I can hardly remember his name, and I met the man, and he met a hundred people to see him that night before, and he knew my name and Mario's name.
It was unbelievable.
That's when I started really learning these politicians do have a unique ability.
Were you aware of Mr. Rudder's health problems before his fatal illness?
No.
That was a jolt.
Same for me.
I was not aware either.
Have you run across anyone who did?
A couple of people that saw him day to day were aware that he was gaining weight.
That's all I'd have heard of.
And that he was losing some of his energy.
that he would wear down quicker, but I was not.
Now, Lindsey was a very close friend of his, if I'm not wrong and recall.
I wonder if he did know anything.
Have you talked to him?
Oh, yes.
I've gotten one, but I want to do some more interviews with John.
Who were the former students that were most – if you were identifying some former students who were most supportive of what you saw happening in economics, who would they be?
Well this one fellow who Al Chalk had mesmerized, and I mean mesmerized, a fellow who worshiped Al.
Al had to be one tremendous teacher.
I can't recall his name, darn it, but he's in Houston, lives in Houston.
I'll try to recall and call your secretary and give you... Not Hal Booty, not Lindsay.
No, no.
Not Les Appelt, not Appelt.
Appelt was one, and there was also this fellow up in Waco.
who became a politician.
Gee, I wish I'd brought Maury with me.
She's so good on these things.
Well, we'll get that later.
Yeah, maybe when we get you up in Rockwall, try to remember these things that I'm blanking out on.
Okay.
Let's see.
Bill Moore.
Oh, Bill Moore was fantastic.
Can I give you a story on that one?
Oh, yes, please do.
I tried to recruit Bill Fouts.
Remember I mentioned this fellow who I met, Charlie Ferguson, and Charlie was Bill's favorite Ph.D.
candidate.
Well Bill was one of my favorite colleagues, indirect colleague, friends in the profession shall I say.
So I finally got Bill Fouts down here for a big party in his honor, trying to tell Bill it's time for you to leave North Carolina.
You've been there for half of a century.
come here to A&M and be happy, and really find a great department in university.
So I had Bill Fouts here, and we're negotiating, and I said everything Bill said he wanted, I said, I'll match it, I'll match that.
I didn't ask him what he was getting.
I just knew what the name of the game was in academia, what the salaries were, what a person like Bill, to me, would be worth at Stanford or elsewhere.
And everything Bill asked for was, gee whiz, if anything, less than I thought I would be willing to go myself.
And I'm not running the department now.
I don't believe it this time.
I think I'd already been turned over to John Allen at this particular occasion.
But in any event, oh God, I've got another story with R.C.
Slocum, because R.C.
Slocum was a coach then.
So this is back in the late 70s at least.
But anyway, so Bill Fouts is here, and finally we ran into the one stumbling block.
He asked about retirement in the state of Texas, and I told him.
He said, well, that's absurd.
He said, Mill, don't you realize what we get in retirement in North Carolina?
And he said, and I know Virginia and other states.
What you guys have down there is pathetic.
I said, well, you know, I really hadn't worried about it.
I did make a deal with Murray that I'd be stuck on TRS instead of ORP, but I didn't let that be of real importance to me personally.
So I decided, well I'm going to check on this thing because I'm not even having a chance for Bill Fouts because of retirement.
I had a student, Bob Gillespie, Lynn Gillespie, we had two PhD candidates in the department.
One was my assistant, Lynn, I think.
I said, Lynn, I've got a job for you.
I want you to go ahead and write to
49 other states in the country and learn their retirement policies for academicians.
I said, when you draft your letter,
give it to me, I'll edit it and make sure I like what you're doing and when you get the information tabulate it and give it to me and let me know how you're doing and do it full speed, quickly."
Well within about a month he gives his report to me.
I was flabbergasted.
There was only one state worse than the state of Texas, namely Mississippi.
I went immediately to visit Bill Presnell and Bill Moore.
I met with each separately, gave them a copy of the report, and I said, and this is when Phil Graham was running for Congress, by the way, because I then went to Auburn to give some lectures.
I showed Bill Moore and Bill Pesnell, and also mentioned this to Bill Clayton one of those evenings that I landed up with him.
I showed them the report that Mississippi was worse than Texas.
The mighty state of Texas was the next worst in the country, and we weren't even close to some of the good states because we were limiting retirement funds on something like that $25,000 level.
Remember that, Haskell?
And I said, isn't this criminal to lose faculty because we are on the level of Mississippi?
Several months later, I'm at Auburn giving lectures, and I received a phone call.
This is obviously then in November, election time.
I received a phone call.
Guess what?
Phil Graham was elected, but I've got better news for you, Mel.
They have not only changed the retirement laws in the state of Texas, they made it retroactive as of a few years earlier.
So for the fellow who retired a few years earlier and maybe was making $33,000, his retirement was based on $33,000.
Bill Moore was then the head of the Senate.
What did we call that fellow, the Speaker of the House?
No, he was the Chairman of the State Affairs Committee.
Well, bless you for knowing that.
And President Pro Tem of the Senate.
Yes.
Anyway, he and Bill Pesnell wheeled and deal that through within a handful of months
And change of law so that now our retirement laws are respectable.
I don't think that they're even top flight yet compared to some things I've heard, but they're pretty darn good.
I've got no complaint.
But that's how that came about.
All right, Nate.
You stepped aside as department head in 69.
But continued on the faculty for how much longer?
Until 1992 active and then I went emeritus.
During those years then, you saw the department continue to grow.
You continued to write and do research.
During all those years,
What were your primary areas of academic emphasis in your own work?
What were you working on most diligently?
Well, what is called spatial microeconomics.
And it adds distance to time, something the economist had not done, and that was based on August Lerch and location economics of his, the spatial ordering of production.
And who else in the world are the other leading scholars in that specialty?
Oh, now there are quite a number.
George Norman, a friend of mine out of...
Actually, he's a Scotsman who used to be at the University of Leicester and is now at Amherst.
And that's Leicester, L-E-I-C-E-S-T-E-R.
L-E-I-C-E-S-T-E-R, that's right.
And took his PhD out of Oxford.
A fellow named Jacques Thisse, I think they call him, but it's T-H-I-S-S-E.
He's out of Belgium.
A fellow named Louis Flips, who's a Frenchman down in...
In Italy right now, at least the last I heard, he was down there.
A fellow named Martin Beckman, who goes back and forth from Bonn and Brown, oddly enough.
It almost sounds contradictory, Bonn and Brown.
And a lot of people in the Orient who have been in this field.
One of them was a student of mine, Hiroshi Oda, who was recommended to
study under me at A&M by a man who translated my plant location book, which was my old dissertation, upgraded a little bit.
Can you summarize the central points in this specialty that I as a layman or anyone in the future could understand?
Let me generalize beyond that a little bit.
Okay, please do.
I don't know if you would be interested in this, this may almost be tangential.
My current interest in life, now that I cannot play golf, tennis, I'm here well, there for a lecture and so forth, is to write a book which I am doing with a son of mine, Science and God.
I'm tired of people thinking that academicians are a bunch of liberal
I'm personally tired of that event that happened to me in Florida State.
You're the only major professor in our whole college who wanted Goldwater.
That doesn't sound like an eclectic university, and of course it was a good one, but this is just a reflection even among academicians that we're all politically correct and so forth and so on.
I don't buy any of this modern day bills, frankly.
I am an old-fashioned conservative who's now found Phil Graham somewhat disappointing in some ways.
Anyway, what I'm doing in this book is demonstrating that cosmologists, physicists, chemists, and mathematicians, philosophers in general, are not
what most people think.
There is Stephen Hawking and his group, you've heard of Stephen Hawking, who claims that what we have here on Earth is not created by God, it's all accidental.
What's accidental?
Well, the nuclear strong force, the nuclear weak force, the electromagnetism, gravity, the relationship in mass between the proton and the electron, and especially the proton and the neutron, ad infinitum.
It's all accident.
In fact, Hawking goes on to say, and do you mind if I get out my little soapbox again, Haskell, because it does tie in with spatial microeconomics.
Hawking would say that in his world there are multiple universes well beyond that which we even know exist.
Because all we can know is what our light years are telling us.
For example, it takes 76 years for a round-trap signal from here to Arcturus and back.
Well, there are ranges way beyond that of our greatest receipts of light that conceivably there are other universes besides those that we don't even know of within our own spectrum of light.
And as a result, in any one of these universes, Hawking and his fellow cosmologists would say, there could be some planet just like ours with all of these unbelievable parameters, physically speaking, in which
There are a bunch of monkeys living because they've got water, they've got all the things that we have on Earth.
They don't have to look like us.
They could be pure monkeys.
And on these planets in the infinite space and time, some monkey could be typing tools that even the Bard of England, Shakespeare, would say, gosh, it's much better than anything I ever did.
And it's pure accident, according to Hawking.
A fellow named Brandon Carter back in the 70s, a physicist said, and he set up the Anthropic Principle, in which he said, boy, this is amazing.
The world that we've got here on Earth alone that we do know of, we're not talking about worlds we don't know exist or might exist, but what we've got is unbelievable.
It is so unbelievable that why not believe in God?
Because, by gosh, what made all of these things combine and fine-tune?
and we are in a fine-tuned world.
The only trouble with all of that is we're talking only about our physical universe.
Well in economics we've got a fine-tuned universe here.
For example, in general equilibrium theory we could set up an infinite number almost of equations, all of which will yield at any given point in time a unique equilibrium.
Leontief, one of the pioneers of matrix algebra in the use in economics, set up the input-output tables.
I'm sure you've heard of and remembered even.
These input-output tables, I know after World War II, the Pentagon was subsidizing so that we could pick out the optimal target in the Soviet Union.
For a bombing run, should we go into war with them?
And what did this input-output table involve?
A whole batch of simultaneous equations with a unique solution which would show us which target might give us the greatest destruction of all possible.
And it is not necessarily the one that looks like the best target.
It might be one that just slips through with all of these other industries and destroys so many things that we cannot visualize without the knowledge that we have and the information that we have got to acquire.
So in the world of economics now, we've got a whole bunch of equations, a whole bunch of those, a whole bunch of columns.
We've got a matrix in other words.
We can invert it easily on a computer and almost any mathematician, any economist can invert the matrix and come up with the unique solutions.
How did we get a world like this in economics?
It's fine-tuned just like the cosmologists tell me.
The nuclear strong force is fine-tuned because it allows protons and neutrons to come together and even
even many protons which otherwise would repulse each other because of their positive charge.
And they come together because of the strong force, the binding energy in effect as a physicist would say, and et cetera.
Well in economics we have almost the same world and that's what my son and I are trying to demonstrate.
We are both talking about and just to provide the fundamental simplicity on this thing,
Way, way back, several centuries before the birth of Jesus Christ, we had a group of philosophers called the atomists, A-T-O-M-I-S-T-S, as you know, Haskell.
These atomists conceived of the atom that no one yet today, to this point in time, has ever been able to see directly.
We know it exists because we've got so many experiments going on and so many ways of proving it by radium and half-lives and all of that.
We know the atom exists, but how did they know this when those people were so doggone dumb?
They didn't go to Harvard.
They didn't go to Oxford.
They didn't even know of Plato and Aristotle who came centuries after them.
To me, the world that I'm living in, maybe because I'm becoming an old character, real old character, is so unbelievable, so amazing, and the human mind has been so amazing.
The knowledge that, especially these physical scientists, more so than I think you and I in our fields, I'd like to believe that we do pretty solid work.
But to me, whenever I learn that, gee whiz, not only is the atom formed by protons, neutrons, electrons, but then they start talking about neutrinos and anti-neutrinos and
Ad infinitum, last I had a count with it, more than 20 sub-particles in the atom that no one yet can see because the atom itself is too small.
And yet we know all about these things, the meson, the muon, what have you.
What the physical scientist has done I think is unbelievable.
I'd like to say what we've done in economics is pretty doggone good.
And I see the same fine-tuned world in economics to say nothing other than the fact that in almost any home here they're gonna have eggs on them.
table for breakfast tomorrow.
How do we get everything so uniquely fine-tuned and combined?
To me, it is just outstanding.
Spatial microeconomics did to economics, or does to economics, what real outer space has been doing to physicists and cosmologists.
It's giving us another dimension.
Actually, in economics, we have basically the simplistic three-space world.
In a sense, we did not include, let me put it more simply, we did not include distances.
We imagine in effect what it boiled down to if you ever wanted to trace the philosophical roots of most of our theories like pure competition.
We in effect are assuming that all buying is at a point, which is ridiculous.
You spread people out over space and you don't have the purely competitive market.
You have a world of oligopoly and oligopsony.
and that means big business rather than a bunch of robots as was imagined in effect by classical economics.
So all Spatial Micro is doing is just adding another problem, the problem of time plus distance, so that we have to include the fact that one seller is differentiated from another not only by his product but by his location, his space, and it just added a
a little complication to the equations that we call our general equilibrium system.
So when we have an equation, for example, to describe our economy, we have to adjust the equation.
May I put it very bluntly?
There is no such thing as a demand curve.
Now who knows that?
Every student on this campus who's taking a course right now in economics would say, now the demand curve is such and such.
Frankly, it doesn't exist.
But if that sounds shocking, the supply curve really doesn't exist the way it's drawn, and in the field of electrics.
Faraday, fields of electrical force.
They don't exist.
He said this is all imaginary.
We imagine things in the world of our minds, including the demand curve and the supply curve that everyone talks about glibly.
It doesn't exist, yet we do it, we use it.
But if we know what we're doing, it's fine.
If we don't know what we're doing, well, then we can make a lot of mistakes.
And politicians, frankly, oftentimes will take
simplistics and make mistakes, but my ultimate point is the world we've got is so darn fine-tuned, so unbelievable.
The older I get, the more I have a chance to learn what chemists have been doing and what have you.
the more I am amazed that the human mind itself cannot be an accident.
The fact that monkeys might type elsewhere would be an accident, I would imagine, but the fact that we are here, and we also have a fine-tuned economic universe, and frankly, I hope someday
that if this book ever does come out and it's being written for the layman, because I'm not pretending to be able to really write physics and chemistry, nor is my son.
We all have chapters.
I'll give you an outline of it in a minute.
We are writing chapters on such things as physics and chemistry, cosmology, relativity, theory, et cetera.
I was talking to Al Cotton earlier today.
I thought Al would say, hey Mel, you're being pretentious.
He said, no, I agree with what you're saying and what I was saying.
Sometimes you don't have to be, in fact, one of the worst things you could do is be a real expert and try to write for others to understand other than if you're writing for experts.
If you're writing for experts on their level, then you're pushing the frontiers of science.
And no way can I push the frontiers of anything, even economics anymore.
But I could sure write to a layman and explain how unbelievable chemistry is, how unbelievable physics is, how unbelievable relativity theory is, and what it boils down to.
And the hardest part of what John and I are doing, because John was a mathematician at A&M, took his bachelor's in math, and then there's econometrics, ECMT, via Bob Baseman here.
He and I, our trouble is with economics, because we want to go beyond ourselves.
We want to push the frontiers back, and that's not possible.
And then when we don't, we think of, gee, this sentence really is not correct.
But it's good enough, and it's hard to say it's good enough when you know it's not correct.
That's what makes, from my standpoint, it relatively easy to be writing about relativity theory.
I can't write about relativity theory the way a real physicist could or a man who's knowledgeable.
and trained in it, but I could write about relativity theory so that presumably my wife, if she wanted to read it, she would find my description easier than anything she could read from an Albert Einstein.
How could he ever write about it than anyone else could read but a great scholar in his area?
As you are getting established as a scholar in economics, what was your first, I'll call it, keystone publication?
What was the title or the topic?
Do you know what I actually did?
I wrote a dissertation on location in the state in Alabama.
Why?
My department head said, Mel, you move into the South, write a dissertation about the South,
and pick your subject, but do something.
Industry is moving to the south," he said.
Write something along that line.
So I learned in the Army, if you're not ready to go and say bad things to others, and if they count, you better do it their way.
So I decided, well, I'll light it on industry in the south.
And I was then with our church, with that German student, reading the spatial ordering of the economy in German.
So I'll go on industrial location in Alabama.
So I wrote my dissertation, which was essentially a rehashing of all of the literature on location economics up until that point in time.
And I threw in some industry studies based on interviews in the state of Alabama of why did you locate here and all of that sort of thing.
But the real guts of my interest was becoming August Lerch's, breaking up of the Soviet Union in the most efficient world.
But I didn't want to include that in my dissertation because I would open up a Pandora's box during my oral exam.
I just wanted a nice, easy, simplistic oral exam with a nice, easy, simplistic dissertation.
So, when I finished that dissertation and got the doctorate, then I started revising it by adding August Lurch, really, into that book.
And tried to, as I mentioned, these articles that I'd sent to a journal that was headed by a German economist, and who just grabbed my articles.
And these articles I threw into this book.
And that book came out and was called Plant Location in Theory and in Practice.
Not Industrial Location in Alabama, but Plant Location in Theory and in Practice.
And it was the first book in the English language since 1936.
And this book came out around 1951, no, 55 rather, excuse me.
And it was the first book in English.
Within a year, two other books appeared on the same general subject, not duplicates in any form, quite dissimilar, but yet still the same basic subject.
So here was a subject that was long overdue.
And I lucked into it because of that German student and the fact that my department head back at Washington University said, write on the South location, industry, something, anything else, find a good subject for yourself.
And I lucked into that subject and revised it, came out with a book.
About two years later, it was translated into Japanese by this man who ultimately sent Oda into A&M to study under me.
And it went in three volumes, and the Japanese and others in the Orient jumped on the bandwagon fairly quickly, and of course, in the United States and England.
What was your next significant publication?
We're talking about mountain peaks now.
Well, a whole bunch of academic articles.
I've put in over a hundred, and I kept wanting more realism in economics, less of this
imagining simplistic worlds.
Let's get down into the brass tacks of the world that we're living in, which of course is economic space.
How can we talk about an economy without even including in one of our fundamental parameters the fact that people are located differentially over space, and that firms compete differently over their spaces.
Some of them invade, for example, on predatory pricing.
The typical cliché still followed by
politicians, shall I say, is the fairest pricing is not to discriminate.
Well, what do they mean by discriminate?
Well, they mean if, for example, I am located at A and I'm going to sell over in D and the cost of transportation from A to D is X, then I add X to my basic price at A and at D I'm charging my basic price plus X and that is
linear pricing, linear in terms of cost of distance, and it is non-predatory.
Well, my son and I, I think John was with me on this article, maybe it was someone else.
John and I had this one on predatory pricing indicating that it could be a very natural phenomenon for the firm at A to price way below even its own price here
at D if it wants to compete and sell and if it can profit maximize without being in the position of trying to destroy the competitor.
It depends on, in other words, a whole conglomerate of forces that otherwise are lost sight of.
So one of the worst things that we do in the world of politics is we glibly accept what looks to be very right, such as you add X to A and you have your price at D,
but maybe the X is an illegitimate addition.
Maybe in terms of the levels of competition, maybe in terms of the demand curve, the type of demand curve, mind you, I say it doesn't exist, but we can imagine a type of demand curve just like Faraday imagines his fields of electrical force.
And it helps us, we humans who don't know too doggone much.
It helps us come up with reasonable decisions.
And if we cannot come up with a decision which we agree is reasonable, let's not even try it.
Let's not try to mess with the economy.
And that's what I think makes me a conservative.
If I mess with the economy, I want to say to myself, I know exactly what I'm doing.
And there are so many things we don't know exactly, especially in the world of the social sciences.
And by gosh, I'm pretty sure any good chemists and physicists, in fact, Albert Carton and I talking earlier today, he was saying one difference between he and me is that I could leave my profession because I couldn't hear well and hence found teaching as a task that I didn't feel like I was up to anymore, that I would be a pretender trying to talk to kids and not let them ask me questions because I couldn't hear them.
I thought, that's not the way to be a professor.
So, therefore, I decided I'm going to retire.
I'm emeritus.
I doubt that the university would have ever fired me because, if anything, I was on the way up professionally all these years.
And I had tenure, and there's no one who could challenge my confidence.
But I fell embarrassed and decided to retire.
And on top of that, I decided I'd better leave this environment because I can't get away from my office.
While I lived here, I'm just so used to it.
So I'm going up to Rockwell.
I'm going to play tennis, play golf.
Unfortunately, physically, that became impossible.
So I landed up doing this sort of thing that I'm talking about.